{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14040\viewh8400\viewkind1
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Dear Editors and Reviewers,\
Thank you again for reading this manuscript and providing feedback. We have carefully gone through each point made changes in the manuscript based on the suggestions from the reviewer. The most major changes in this round of revisions were to add a suppelemental figure to bolster the robustness of the analysis, and a slight rearrangment of the introduction to add citations and improve flow. \
\
We are including a detailed description of the changes we made in a separate document. The original reviewer's comments are in black. Our responses are in blue, and excerpts of text from the manuscript are in gray highlighted with yellow. We are also including a version of the manuscript with tracked changes. We have also attempted to format the manuscript to adhere to the specifications of 
\f1\i Genome Research.
\f0\i0 \
\
We think that the comments made by the reviewers were insightful and helped further clarify the manuscript for readers. We thank the reviewers for their work and welcome any additional suggestions for improvement. \
\
Sincerely,\
Gregory Carter}