{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13440\viewh7800\viewkind1
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Dear Editors and Reviewers,\
We truly appreciate your careful reading of this manuscript and your thoughtful comments. We know how much time and effort it takes to review a manuscript, and we are grateful for all your thoughts.\
\
We have carefully gone through each point and have substantially revised the manuscript based on the suggestions from the reviewers. Each reviewer pointed out significant issues that prompted us to run further computational experiments and to revise our conclusions. \
The major changes were as follows:\
\
1. We rewrote the abstract and introduction to put this study into context. These sections now focus more on the DO mice and their inbred founders. We also added descriptions of previous studies that have examined inter-individual variation of epigenetics.\
\
2. We changed our analysis of the imputed epigenetic features to make the results comparable to each other. This resulted in substantial changes to the results section and the discussion section.\
\
3. We added a figure to show more results from the DNA methylation portion of this analysis, as well as sections of main text devoted to DNA methylation.\
\
4. We added a substantial number of supplemental figures to better address gaps in the main text and figures. The manuscript now includes eight main figures and nine supplemental figures.\
\
We are including a detailed description of the changes we made in a separate document. The original reviewer's comments are in black. Our responses are in blue, and excerpts of text from the manuscript are in gray highlighted with yellow. We are also including a version of the manuscript with tracked changes, although the usefulness might be limited due to the extensive nature of the edits.\
\
We think that the comments made by the reviewers were insightful and incredibly useful. They have vastly improved the manuscript, as well as our own understanding of the epigenetic landscape of the DO mice and their founders. We thank the reviewers for their work and welcome any additional suggestions for improvement. \
\
Sincerely,\
Gregory Carter}