{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13440\viewh7800\viewkind1
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
Genome Research\
Anna Tyler (Author) Queue SummaryReviewer Area	SubmitSubmission History  HelpFAQFeedback Log Out\
not 1-4,9\
Decision Letter\
[Return to Queue]\
\
\
\
\
To: Petko M Petkov <petko.petkov@jax.org>\
From: Hillary Sussman <hsussman@cshlbp.org>\
Subject: Genome Research -- Manuscript Decision\
Cc: \
\
\
\
RE:  GENOME/2022/277467\
\
\
\
Dear Dr. Petkov,\
\
\
\
Your revised manuscript entitled, "Variation in histone configurations correlates with gene expression across nine inbred strains of mice," has been reviewed.  Please visit https://submit.genome.org to view the referees' comments. \
\
\
\
As you will see, the referee found the work improved, but did raise some points that still need to be addressed before the work is suitable for publication. In addition, please address the following Editorial issues. \
\
\
\
Please modify: \
\
Pkd2 (italics; Figure 8)\
\
\
\
Please include a pointer in the main text to Figure 8B and F. \
\
\
\
Please rename Supplemental File 2 \'97> Supplemental Code and update the pointer in the Data access section. \
\
\
\
Please consider including author contributions in the Acknowledgments section.\
\
\
\
Please ensure that all tools are cited in the text and referenced if published (e.g., Bowtie 2).\
\
\
\
Given that you can make these changes to the manuscript, we will be happy to accept your manuscript in principle for publication in Genome Research.  Please read carefully through all the referees' comments and address each point. \
\
\
\
Please include Supplemental Figure and Table legends with their respective Supplemental Figures and Tables in a well-organized Supplemental Material document, and upload as a Supplemental file(s), not as source files. Please also ensure Supplemental files themselves are named according to our specific convention, with underscores connecting all segments in each file name and with the file-type extension in view: Supplemental_Fig_S1.pdf, Supplemental_Fig_S2.eps, Supplemental_Table_S1.xlsx, Supplemental_Table_S2.docx, Supplemental_Movie_S1.mov, Supplemental_Methods.pdf, etc.  You may also submit a combined Supplemental Figures or Supplemental Material document as a PDF but Tables in excel format should remain separate from the combined file(s). Each supplemental figure, table, movie, or data file must be cited in the main text; citations and supplemental file names must match (e.g., Supplemental Fig S1 in the text points to Supplemental_Fig_S1.pdf, etc.). \
\
\
\
Additionally, please go through each point below as these are required for prompt publication of the manuscript:\
\
\
\
\
\
------\
\
1) Please also go through your work once more to make sure it is written in as streamlined a fashion as possible.  This is the best way to be sure the main points of the work are highlighted.  Any redundancies in the text should be removed, and only points of main interest should be included in results and discussion.  Material not essential to the direct understanding of the manuscript should be considered carefully for online-only Supplemental Material; all lengthy tables should be reduced to a single page where possible, and the complete table made available as Supplemental Material. If English is your second language, a native English speaker should proofread the work prior to submission of the revision.\
\
\
\
2) Check our Author Instructions at https://submit.genome.org to make sure you are following all data availability and fair-use rules AND to format your manuscript in our house style.  Putting your manuscript in the appropriate format will serve to expedite your manuscript for publication as well as save substantially on possible production fees incurred during the processing of your manuscript by the printer, who charges for any changes made during galley stages. Pay special attention to the appropriate ORDER of the sections (or obtain permission from the editor to alter the format), and also be absolutely sure figures and tables are SEPARATE from the text and figure legends are SEPARATE from figures.  \
\
\
\
Please be reminded that you MUST use current and approved nomenclature for gene and protein names and symbols (including appropriate use of italics [using italics is a standard for nucleic acids, so format all gene symbols, loci, transcripts, promoter and enhancer elements in italics] and capitalization as it applies for each species' standard nomenclature format, in text, tables, and figures. For website links for data submission, nomenclature rules, or for submission of gene or protein names, see Web Site Links for Data Submission and Appropriate Nomenclature at http://www.genome.org/misc/ifora_weblinks.shtml. Failure to use appropriate nomenclature for manuscripts that have been accepted can result in change fees and significant delays at the time of manuscript processing.   \
\
\
\
All data utilized in this manuscript must be made available by submitting it to the appropriate public databases.  In the absence of an appropriate database, the data must be submitted as Supplemental Material to be posted at the Genome Research website (you may also, of course, post it at your own website).\
\
\
\
3) We now absolutely require the Corresponding Author to agree to the online AUTHOR DECLARATION on behalf of all authors and for any conflicts or competing interests to be disclosed in the online DISCLOSURE DECLARATION, so please ensure EACH and every author is contacted regarding these items prior to submission of a revised manuscript. Both the AUTHOR DECLARATION and DISCLOSURE DECLARATION can be found in the Additional Requirements section of the online submission form.\
\
\
\
4) From your Author Area at submit.genome.org please download, fill out, sign, and return the LICENSE TO PUBLISH.  Please e-mail the LICENSE TO PUBLISH to Tara Bonet-Black, Administrative Assistant, Tel: 516-422-4012; Fax: 516-422-4094; e-mail: bonetbl@cshlbp.org. Any delay in sending this form will cause a delay in the production of your manuscript for publication.\
\
\
\
More information on our OPEN ACCESS and the ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT options can be found online at www.genome.org. \
\
\
\
5) All data or information obtained through personal communication also requires a letter of approval for use. Authors are responsible for obtaining permission from the rights-holder to adapt or reproduce material previously published elsewhere (typically, this will be the publisher) and for including any required permission statement alongside the citation.  Please reply to this e-mail with PERMISSIONS or upload as a supplemental file. Any delay in sending this will cause a delay in the production of your manuscript for publication.\
\
\
\
6) Please note we accept electronic art files created in TIFF, EPS, PDF, JPEG, or AI when the digital file specifications are adhered to (see parameters online in Submission of Electronic Figures for Accepted Manuscripts: Detailed Instructions available in Author Info at www.genome.org).  Please provide appropriately formatted art files in the system and indicate that correct art files are available online on the manuscript checklist.\
\
\
\
----------\
\
\
\
When you submit your revised manuscript to our online system, please use the "submit a revised manuscript" button. Note, at this stage, the text and tables must be submitted online as WORD files (.doc) so that we have source files from which the Production team can process your manuscript (the system will convert these to a single PDF for editorial reviewing purposes and Production will use the WORD source file for converting your manuscript to eProofs). If absolutely necessary, we can use .tex files but will use the PDF to double-check formatting and also require a bibliography (.bbl) file for the references.  In cases where the source file is in LaTex, BE ABSOLUTELY SURE the PDF of your manuscript matches exactly as this will be our only source for creating properly formatted proofs. \
\
\
\
I look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.\
\
\
\
\
\
With regards,\
\
\
\
Hillary Sussman, Ph.D\
\
Executive Editor\
\
Genome Research\
\
\
\
			\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Genome Research Journal Site Contact Us Terms of  Use Privacy Policy	\'a9 2023 Genome Research\
}