{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Menlo-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red3\green45\blue153;\red83\green104\blue112;\red252\green244\blue220;
\red83\green104\blue112;\red3\green45\blue153;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c25950\c66514;\cssrgb\c39608\c48235\c51373;\cssrgb\c99216\c96471\c89020;
\cssrgb\c39608\c48235\c51373;\cssrgb\c0\c25950\c66514;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13740\viewh8100\viewkind1
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Dear Reviewer,\
Thank you again for going through our manuscript and providing feedback. We appreciate the clarification on your point about State 5. We have added text to the discussion to point out that bivalent promoters are not usually associated with H3K27ac (see below). We have also fixed the error in numbering the supplemental figures.\
Our responses to the comments are below. The original comments are in black. Our responses are in blue. And text taken from the manuscript is in gray text with yellow highlighting. \
\
Reviewer 1 Comments for the Author...\
The authors were generally responsive to my previous comments.\
\
With respect to my previous comment 9, my point was that while H3K4me1 or H3K4me3 are associated with a bivalent state, H3K27ac, which is also an activating mark, is not typically associated with the bivalent state or co-occurring with H3K27me3.\
\
\cf2 We have made minor edits the discussion to address this discrepancy between the presence of H3K27ac in State 5 and its annotation as a bivalent promoter. The edited paragraphs are as follows:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
State 5 was also annotated as a bivalent promoter, but the \
evidence for this annotation was less clear than for the other\
states with this annotation. State 5 was enriched primarily \
around predicted bivalent promoters in mouse liver (Fig. 2). However, it also included the presence of H3K27ac, which is typically associated with active enhancers, rather than inactive bivalent promoters (Creyghton et al. 2010; Voigt et al. 2013). The association of State 5 with gene expression was also inconsistent. This state was associated with lower gene expression in hepatocytes, but with higher gene expression when looking across strains. That is, genes with State 5 were more lowly expressed than other hepatocyte genes, but for any given gene, strains with State 5 had higher expression than strains with other states in the same position.\cf5 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 \
\
\cf3 \cb4 \outl0\strokewidth0 The association of State 5 with reduced expression within hepatocytes is consistent with the annotation of bivalent promoter. Genes marked with this state were enriched for vascular development and Wnt signaling, further supporting the annotation. When positions marked with State 5 varied across strains, the most common alternate state at these positions was State 12, another bivalent promoter. Thus, this group of genes in general was down-regulated relative to other genes. However, \
our results suggest that State 5 was associated with less severe \
down-regulation when compared with State 12, resulting in an apparent up-regulation when looking across strains. It is also possible that the inconsistent results observed for State 5 indicate that it was a mixture of State 12 and another state. State 5 had a very similar abundance distribution, effect size distribution, and GO term enrichments to State 12. As a whole, the group of states annotated as bivalent promoters raise the intriguing possibility of identifying new modes of expression \
regulation through histone modification. Although these five states all recieved the same annotation, each had a unique pattern of distribution around the gene body and association with gene expression suggesting that each represents a different functional element in the mouse genome.\cf5 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\
There appears to be a swap of Fig. S6 and Fig. S7.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf6 Thank you for catching this error! We have fixed the numbering in the supplemental figures.}