{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c1680\c19835\c100000;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18760\viewh11100\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Gary's comments\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
>> Avoid novelty claim \'96 most journals not allow this. Say it in the cover letter.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf0 We further demonstrate that strain variation in chromatin state, paired 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 21 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 with gene expression is useful for annotation of functional regions of the mouse genome. 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 22 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 Finally, we provide a data resource that documents variation 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 23
\f1\fs24 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 in chromatin state across genetically distinct individuals.\
\cf2 removed mention of "first data resource"\cf0 \

\f1\fs24 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 >> Combine and condense PP2 & 3 into one.
\f1\fs24 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 Epigenetic modifications allow a single genome to give rise to many different types of 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 39 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 cells with diverse morphology and physiology. Variation in epigenetic landscapes across 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 40 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 cell types has been extensively documented [5,23].  Patterns of histone modifications and DNA methylation are established during 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 32 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 development. The result is a canonical epigenetic landscape for coordination of major 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 33 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 patterns of gene expression for each cell type (for review, see [8,9]). As an organism 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 34 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 ages and responds to its environment, patterns of both histone modifications [10\'9613] 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 35 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 and of DNA methylation [14,15] change. Variation in epigenetic modifications have been 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 36 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 linked to premature aging [16,17], autism [18,19], cancer [20,21], and neurological 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 37 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 diseases among others [22].  [5,23]. Less well understood, however, is the 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 41 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 role that genetic variation plays in determining epigenetic landscapes.
\f1\fs24 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 I agree. This has been condensed.\cf0 \

\f1\fs24 \
\
>>. Line 44\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 have distinct gene expression profiles\cf2 \
I clarified this point by deleting that sentence and skipping straight to the stuff about variation across individuals.\cf0 \

\f1\fs24 \
 \
>>. There is a lot of topic (story arc) crossing in the intro.  Too hard to edit the pdf but I would be happy to take a shot at it in an editable format.  Or you could do it\'85\
First talk about epigenetic modifications, then how they alter GEX and cell types, then discuss genetic variation and finally disease assocations.
\fs29\fsmilli14667 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 I modified the introduction
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>> line 158 replace \'93sacrifice\'94 with \'93euthanasia\'94\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 done
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \

\fs24 >> line 171-3 
\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 The pseudogenomes were 
\fs13\fsmilli6667 171 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 created using G2GTools ( cite GitHub link)  \'85. We used EMASE to quantify the gene expression counts and DESeq2 vst transformation to normalize the GEX data.
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 fixed this\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
>> line 269-70  why not fit a joint (multiple regression) model?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For clarity or representation of the effects of each state. I added a few sentences in the Chromatin State and Gene Expression section of the methods.
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \

\fs24 >> 
\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 line 271  use \'93rank normal scores\'94 (you should describe in Methods or cite Connover non-parametrics text) \'96 avoid repeating the phrase\'85\
\cf2 cited Connover. Replace rank Z normalized with rank normal scores. \

\f1\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 >> line 293-5. What about fully methylated in half of the cells?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 This is indistinguishable from hemi-methylated in this study.
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>>. I like the imputation.  Simple.\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 too simple?
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>> line 343. Subspecific\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Fixed
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>> Fig 2 \'96 is this all consistent with previous studies?  Any surprises?\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Added a sentence to the results to indicate that this is basically what we expected to see.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0  \
>> line 406 delete \'93Remarkably\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Done
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0  \
 \
>>  Line 413-420. Is this because these are associated with CpG islands \'96 a larger scale feature that will not vary (much) between strains?\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Added a sentence about CpG islands being highly conserved across vertebrates\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0  \
>> 423-8 revise or delete.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Deleted sentences about using mapping populations to determine causal links
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>> 561 \'96 are any of the bivalent promoters associated with gene-expression response to diet (sex)?  Or maybe that doesn\'92t make sense\'85\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 I have looked at this a little bit. Chromatin state does not explain less variation in the HFD animals compared to the LFD animals. 
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
 \
>>. Important: If it is a \'93resource\'94 dataset, tell us how would someone use these data to explore a particular gene or other questions related to chromatin states and gene expression? \

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Added a sentence at the end of the discussion to make the point that the broader community can query this resource for candidate regulatory regions.
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
\
>> The paper could use more detailed examples of specific genes but that would be a lot of extra work at this stage\

\f2\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 I agree. 
\f1\fs29\fsmilli14667 \cf0 \
\
GM070683 (GAC). Thanks.}